CHAPTER ONE

INTRODUCTION

Background of SIWES
Student’s Industrial Work Experience Scheme (SIWES) established in the year 1973, is a skills training acquisition programme designed to expose and prepare students in universities and other tertiary institutions for the industrial work they are likely to meet after attaining their degrees or diploma. It offers real working experience based on their future profession while they are still studying. SIWES was formulated to help students studying science and technology in Nigeria gain the technical skills needed during their period of study. 

Before SIWES, the early phase of science and technology it was mostly characterized by theoretical lectures in higher institutions. This became a problem as it affected the social development and economic growth of the country. SIWES was introduced to the industrial and educational sector in order to improve the standard of education and also achieve technological advancement. 

During the initial period, SIWES was solely funded by the Industrial Training Funds (ITF). As the years went by, the responsibility was shared between ITF and the Federal Government of Nigeria in which both parties played an important role. The various responsibilities are as follows:

Federal Government:

The Federal Government took over the funding for the scheme.
Making it mandatory for ministries, companies, and organisations to offer places of attachment for students in accordance with the provision decree of No 47 of 1971 as amended in 1990. 
Industrial Training Fund: 

ITF on the other hand took on the role of managing the money given to them by the Government, provide logistics and materials required to administer the scheme.
Formulation of policies and guidelines on SIWES for distribution to all the SIWES participating bodies and companies involved with the scheme on a regular basis.
The duration of this scheme is 6 months which is equivalent to 18 weeks, it is done usually in the third or fourth year depending on the university and after the first year in polytechnics (ND1).

Aims and Objectives of SIWES
To expose students to the real world of work methods and techniques.
To enable students to acquire industrial skills.
Enhance student’s contact with potential employers during the training.
To help student appreciate the role their profession plays in the society.
To make the transition from higher institutions to the workforce easier.

CHAPTER TWO

EXPERIENCE

Practical Application of what was learnt.
Teaching
	One of the practical experience we had was teaching. It was a good experience because of how important teaching is. Our society demands high quality teaching from teachers and teachers have to practice inorder to meet those demands. Teachers provided with proper training make the best teachers because teachers develop skills over time through the best practices shared by other teachers. We practiced how to manage a class and the best way to communicate with students so that they can understand.   
	Some set of nursery school students came to Blue Sapphire in order to be introduced to computing, so we introduced them to computing by teaching them how to start, restart and shutdown a computer. We showed them all the different parts of the computer and their uses. Each and every student learned the basic input devices that helps us put data into the computer or give instructions to the computer. For example the keyboard which can be used to type words, numbers and symbols into the computer, the mouse which is a pointing device, the scanner which is used to copy pictures or pages, the microphone which is used to input sounds, a web camera which is used to take photos or videos, the Central processing device etc and the main output devices which helps us show the result of processing for example the monitor which is the screen of the computer, the printer which prints out your documents on a sheet of paper, the speakers which produce the sounds processed by the computer etc. We also taught them how to create, rename and delete a folder. At the end we realized among all the things we taught them they enjoyed Microsoft Paint the most. We also had some students from some government secondary schools. The learned so many things which includes all about components of a computer and how they operate, graphics package, how to use Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel and Microsoft Power Point etc. The last set of students we had were kids from age 5 to 10. They came during holiday for summer classes from different schools. They were introduced to so many fun activities during their two weeks classes. One of the things they learned was scratch which is a software that includes different pictures of pets and people with sounds and animations. All the students learned how to play musical notes in scratch by using the scratch card, they made their script using different pictures and colorful messages and at the end each child developed a game.

Microsoft Paint - Microsoft Paint is an educational software that allows children to draw, color and edit pictures. Teaching this software can help to develop children’s ability while using graphics software. It also helps children to be familiar with using the mouse because they use it to as a paintbrush or pen to draw in Microsoft Paint. Microsoft Windows Paint software is also very easy to learn and use. It is also fun and interesting hence children tend to really like it. So our students enjoyed Microsoft Windows Paint, they learned how to draw and paint, they drew different objects houses, cars, etc. They also learned how to save their work and open their saved work                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Microsoft Word -  Microsoft Word is very important. It is an important tool in creating any document e.g. Report, letter, books etc it is designed for performing different activities such as typing, editing and printing documents. You can easily create and personalize your document the way you want it to be. You can also import and export documents to or from different packages. The students were first taught how to start a document, save their document and open a saved document and then how to edit their document by changing text size and font, how to bold, italicize and underline text, how to create a numbered or bulleted list, how to align and justify text e t c The students understood the various important parts of Microsoft Windows like
The file tab which we use to open or save files, create new documents, print a document, and do other file related operations.
The Ribbon which includes the following tabs Home, Insert, Page Layout, Reference, Mailings, Review, View, Add-Ins etc which includes different demands.
The quick access toolbar which you can customize based on the commands you use the most in word.
Title bar which shows the program and document titles.
The Help Icon which which is used to get word related help anytime you like.
The zoom control used for zooming in or out.
The view buttons which includes the print layout view, full screen reading view, web layout view, outline view, draft view etc
The document area where you type.
Microsoft Excel - Microsoft Excel which is a spreadsheet developed by Microsoft contains various educational and business tools and features. It is also very important especially when it comes to formula-based calculations and many other mathematical functions. In excel, students can learn the fastest way to do calculations with accuracy. It helps students to perform complex mathematical, logical and financial calculation faster with accuracy. Students can also learn how to convert raw data into meaningful information with excel. In our excel class, we showed the students excel ribbon, the spreadsheet grid, status bar, formula bar, quick access toolbar and explained their uses. They were also introduced to the basic formulas , basic functions, sorting and filter, charts and tables etc
Microsoft Power Point - Ideally students should learn Microsoft Power Point which is a presentation program by the time they reach secondary school. With power point skills students can make  impressive presentations and reports. In power point we taught the students how to create a document by adding text, transition and animation, how to work with images and how to create a slideshow of their complete document.

Project
 Another practical experience we had was creating a project with our instructor. We worked as a whole team and created a single project. We were really motivated as we all worked towards the same goal. It is always believed two heads are better than one. So working as a group enables us to learn from one another, it creates new ideas, it allows you to complete the work faster, with team work you get the best that everyone needs to offer so at the end you get a better result.

We installed visual studio code and Nginx together. Our instructor introduced us to algorithms and taught us how to analyze and write algorithms. He told us about the different types of sorting algorithms - merge sort, quick sort and insertion sort. We also implemented a binary search algorithm using PHP.  At the end we worked together and created our project using PHP.

Before we left Blue Sapphire we started our school project individually. We used html and css and created the front end design of our project. We created our login page, signup page, contact form and homepage of our project.


PROGRAMMING ASPECT of what was learnt.

We were introduced to different programming languages in blue sapphire. As we all know A programming language is a computer language programmers use to develop software programs, scripts, or other sets of instructions for the computer to execute. Although many languages share similarities, each has its own syntax so we learned the syntax of different programming languages. We started with C#, we were than introduced to android studio and then Web Application.


ANDROID STUDIO
•	JAVA
Java is a programming language is a general-purpose language that is class-based, object oriented and designing to have as few implementation dependencies as possible. It can run on all platforms that support java without the need for recompilation. Java application are typically complied with bytecode that can run on any java virtual machine (JVM) regardless of underlying architecture. We learned how to use the basic language constructs that include input and output, JOptionPane, Variables to mention but a few.


WEB APPLICATION
Web Application is an application that runs on a remote server. Web Application development is the process of of developing web applications. Website can be defined as a collection of webpages that can be accessed through the internet and Web Design is the process of creating websites.
 We were introduced to Modern Web Design which includes HTML for the structure, CSS for the presentation, Javascript for the behavior, and PHP can be used for the backend. 
We started with HTML because the ability to code using HTML is essential for any web professional. Acquiring this skill was our starting point because we want to learn how to create content of the web. We then moved to CSS which work hand in hand with HTML while HTML sorts out the page structure, CSS defines how HTML elements are displayed. CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets. Cascading refers to the way CSS applies one style on top of another and Style Sheet controls the look and feel of document. The main benefit of CSS is that it allows you to separate style from content. It allows you to apply specific styles to specific HTML elements. Javascript which is a programming language is used to add interactivity to the web pages. It is one of the most important programming language on earth which is used to process data as well as create various applications e.g. mobile apps, games etc.


HTML - HTML stands for HyperText Markup Language and unlike a scripting or programming language that uses script to perform functions, a markup language uses tags to identify content. HTML is a standard mark-up language used for creating web application to give it structure. It uses syntax or notation to organize and give information about the page to the browser. There are different element tags ranging from header tags, link, image, input etc
CSS - CSS stands for cascading style sheets and it was used to describe how the the html elements are displayed on the screen. It controls the layouts of the web pages. Basic CSS which includes color, fonts, padding, margin, CSS selectors etc were discussed. CSS flexbox and CSS gridbox were discussed and implemented. They work by turning HTML elements into a container with rows and columns for you to place children where you want in the grid. Also difference between flexbox and gridbox were seen.
Javascript - 

VUE. JS
We were than introduced to VueJS which is an open source progressive JavaScript framework used to develop interactive web interfaces. It is one of the famous frameworks used to simplify web development. VueJS focusses on the view layer. It can be easily integrated into big projects for front- end development without any issues. We We were shown the various ways vue js can be installed. Vue js can be installed using CDN, NPM or CLI Command Line. We looked at the vue instances, data and methods, data binding, events and events modifiers, conditional and loops, classes, objects and arrays in vue js.

VUE INSTANCES - To start with VueJS, we need to create the instance of Vue, which is called the root Vue Instance. We looked at different examples and  understood what needs to be part of the Vue constructor.
Methods - method is a group of statement that performs a particular task.

Data Binding - The data binding feature helps manipulate or assign values to HTML attributes, change the style, assign classes with the help of binding directive called v-bind available with VueJS.

Event and Event Handling - V-on is the attribute added to the DOM elements to listen to the events in VueJS.

Event Modifiers - Vue has event modifiers available on v-on attribute. Following are some of the modifiers available: .once , .prevent etc

Conditional and Loops - we discussed the use of if, if-else, if-else-if, show and for loop. Conditionals are used when we want to output only when the condition is met and the conditional check is done with the help of if, if-else, if-else-if, show, etc. Loop is used to iterate over an array. With for loop, we have to use v-for=”a in items” where a holds the values in the array and will display till all the items are done.

VUE JS COMPONENTS - Vue Components are one of the important features of VueJS that creates custom elements, which can be reused in HTML..

VUE TEMPLATE - We learned how to get an output in the form of HTML template on the screen.

VUE JS COMPUTED PROPERTIES - Computed properties are like methods but with some difference in comparison to methods,


CHAPTER THREE

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

Summary

Recommendation A detail of list of places students can undertake their SIWES training should be provided so as to select the best choice suitable to their course of study.

Conclusion The completion of my SIWES programme marks a successful beginning of a prosperous career as I have gathered practical experiences that will greatly help me in my field of study. I have become versatile with teaching and I have gained more knowledge in programming 
Thanks I am grateful to my supervisor Dr Faruq Ambursa for his time effort, support and encouragement. I am also grateful to my Industry based supervisor and all the staff members at Blue Sapphire. 




 









